THE MAHARASHTRA RENT CONTROL ACT, 1999
(Maharashtra Act No. XVIII of 2000)
Enacted by the Maharashtra State Legislature
An Act to unify, consolidate and amend the law relating to the control of rent and repairs of certain premises and of eviction and for the encouragement of the construction of new houses.

CHAPTER I: PRELIMINARY
Section 7. Definitions:
(3) "Landlord" means any person who is for the time being receiving, or entitled to receive, rent in respect of any premises whether on his own account or on account, or on behalf, or for the benefit of any other person or as a trustee, guardian, or receiver.
(14) "Tenant" means any person by whom or on whose account rent is payable for any premises and includes any person remaining in possession after the determination of the lease.
(15) "Standard rent" in relation to any premises means the rent fixed by the court under Section 8 or agreed rent subject to the provisions of this Act.

CHAPTER II: PROVISIONS REGARDING FIXATION OF STANDARD RENT AND PERMITTED INCREASES
Section 10. Increase in rent on account of improvements or special repairs:
(1) A landlord shall be entitled to make such increase in the annual rent of premises on account of any improvement or structural alteration of the premises which has been made with the written consent of seventy percent of the tenants.
(2) A landlord shall not be entitled to make any increase in rent on account of ordinary repairs which it was the duty of the landlord to carry out.

CHAPTER III: RELIEF AGAINST FORFEITURE
Section 14. Landlords duty to keep premises in good repair:
(1) Every landlord shall be bound to keep the premises in good and tenantable repair.
(2) If the landlord neglects to make any repairs which he is bound to make under sub-section (1), within reasonable time after notice is served upon him by the tenant, the tenant may make the repairs himself and deduct the expenses of such repairs from the rent, or otherwise recover them from the landlord. Provided that the amount so deducted shall not exceed one-fourth of the rent payable by the tenant for that year.

Section 15. Relief against forfeiture:
(1) A landlord shall not be entitled to the recovery of possession of any premises so long as the tenant pays, or is ready and willing to pay, the amount of the standard rent and permitted increases, and observes and performs the other conditions of the tenancy, in so far as they are consistent with the provisions of this Act.
(2) No suit for recovery of possession shall be instituted by a landlord against a tenant on the ground of non-payment of the standard rent or permitted increases until the expiration of ninety days next after notice in writing demanding the payment of the rent.

CHAPTER IV: RECOVERY OF POSSESSION
Section 16. Grounds for recovery of possession by landlord:
(1) A landlord shall be entitled to recover possession of any premises if the Court is satisfied:
(a) that the tenant has committed any act contrary to the provisions of clause (o) of section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882;
(b) that the tenant has, without the landlord's consent given in writing, erected on the premises any permanent structure;
(c) that the tenant, without the previous consent in writing of the landlord, has sub-let the whole or any part of the premises or assigned or transferred in any other manner his interest therein;
(d) that the tenant or any person residing with the tenant has been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance or an annoyance to the adjoining or neighboring occupiers;
(e) that the premises are reasonably and bona fide required by the landlord for occupation by himself or by any person for whose benefit the premises are held.

CHAPTER VI: PROVISIONS REGARDING ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND RENT RECEIPTS
Section 29. Landlord not to cut-off or withhold essential supply or service:
(1) No landlord shall, without just or sufficient cause, cut off or withhold any essential supply or service enjoyed by the tenant in respect of the premises let to him.
(2) Essential supply or service includes supply of water, electricity, lights in passages and on staircases, lifts and conservancy or sanitary services.
(3) If the landlord contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 31. Rent receipts:
(1) Every landlord shall give a written receipt for any amount of rent or permitted increase received by him in respect of the premises in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) If any landlord fails to give a written receipt as required by sub-section (1), he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day of default.

CHAPTER VIII: REGISTRATION OF AGREEMENT
Section 55. Tenancy agreement to be in writing and registered:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any agreement for a leave and licence or letting of any premises, entered into between the landlord and the tenant or the licensee, after the commencement of this Act, shall be in writing and shall be registered under the Registration Act, 1908.
(2) The responsibility of getting such agreement registered shall be upon the landlord.
(3) Any landlord who contravenes the provisions of this section shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine not exceeding five thousand rupees, or with both.
