THE MAHARASHTRA FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY MEASURES ACT, 2006
(Maharashtra Act No. III of 2007)
Enacted by the Maharashtra State Legislature
An Act to make more effective provisions for the fire prevention and life safety measures in various types of buildings in the State of Maharashtra.

Section 3. Duty of owner or occupier to maintain fire prevention and life safety measures:
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law or the National Building Code of India, the owner or occupier of any building shall provide and maintain in good condition fire prevention and life safety measures as specified in the Schedule to this Act.
(2) The owner or occupier of the building shall furnish to the Chief Fire Officer a certificate in the prescribed form issued by a licensed agency regarding the maintenance of the fire prevention and life safety measures in good repair and efficient condition.

Section 6. Notice regarding default in fire safety measures:
(1) If the Chief Fire Officer or authorized inspecting officer finds that any fire safety measures required under Section 3 have not been provided or are not maintained in proper condition, he may serve upon the owner or occupier a notice requiring him to undertake specified corrective measures within thirty days.
(2) If the owner or occupier fails to comply with the directions issued in the notice, the Chief Fire Officer may seal the building, disconnect electrical or water supplies, or initiate criminal prosecution.

Section 8. Prohibition against obstruction of common exits and staircases:
(1) No owner or occupier shall store, accumulate, or deposit combustible materials, furniture, packaging materials, or any other goods in common entrance lobbies, corridors, stairways, fire exit passages, or refuge terraces of a residential building.
(2) All fire escape routes, staircases, and exit doorways shall be kept completely unobstructed and illuminated at all times.
(3) Tampering with, obstructing, or wedging open fire check doors (FCD) or propping open pressurized smoke-stop doors is strictly prohibited.

Section 25. Penalties:
Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply with any notice or order shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both; and where the offence is a continuing one, with a further fine of three thousand rupees for every day during which the failure continues.
