MAHARASHTRA MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS ACT & MUNICIPAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
Urban Development Department, Government of Maharashtra
PROVISIONS ON HABITABILITY, SANITATION, DRAINAGE AND DANGEROUS STRUCTURES

1. REGULATION OF DRAINS AND SANITARY CONVENIENCES:
Section 247: All drains, privies, water-closets, house-gullies, and cesspools in a residential premises shall be under the control of the Municipal Corporation and shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition by the owner or occupier.
Section 248: If any residential premises is without a drain or with a drain insufficient for effectual drainage, the Commissioner may by written notice require the owner to construct an adequate drain discharging into a municipal sewer.
Section 257: The Municipal Commissioner or authorized health inspector may inspect any drain, privy, or water supply pipe. If upon inspection, any pipe or fitting is found defective or emitting foul sewer gas, the Commissioner shall order the owner or occupier to carry out immediate repairs within seven days.

2. DANGEROUS AND DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
Section 354. Removal of structures, etc., which are in ruins or likely to fall:
(1) If it shall at any time appear to the Commissioner that any structure (including any building, wall or other structure and anything affixed to or projecting from any building, wall or other structure) is in a ruinous condition, or likely to fall, or in any way dangerous to any person occupying, resorting to or passing by such structure, the Commissioner may, by written notice, require the owner or occupier thereof forthwith to pull down, secure, or repair such structure.
(2) The Commissioner may also, if the danger is imminent, require the occupants to vacate the premises immediately to prevent catastrophic collapse or injury.
(3) Structural distress characterized by deep diagonal cracks through load-bearing brickwork, spalling concrete exposing rusted reinforcing bars, or severe sag in floor slabs requires professional structural auditing and propping under municipal direction.

3. REMOVAL OF INSANITARY NUISANCES:
Section 381: Prohibition of accumulation of water or breeding places of mosquitoes:
(1) No owner or occupier of any building shall allow water to accumulate in basements, air-conditioner trays, terraces, or water storage tanks so as to facilitate the breeding of mosquitoes or create an insanitary nuisance.
(2) Failure to abate mosquito breeding or remedy persistent raw sewage leakage into residential basements carries a municipal penalty of up to five thousand rupees and mandatory remediation costs.
