THE REGISTRATION ACT, 1908 & MAHARASHTRA STATE AMENDMENTS
Inspector General of Registration and Controller of Stamps (IGR Maharashtra)
MANDATORY REGISTRATION OF LEASES AND LEAVE AND LICENSE AGREEMENTS

1. CENTRAL PROVISIONS (THE REGISTRATION ACT, 1908):
Section 17. Documents of which registration is compulsory:
(1)(d) Leases of immoveable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent, shall be registered compulsorily.

Section 49. Effect of non-registration of documents required to be registered:
No document required by Section 17 or by any provision of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 to be registered shall:
(a) affect any immoveable property comprised therein; or
(b) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property, unless it has been registered.
Provided that an unregistered document affecting immoveable property may be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under Chapter II of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, or as evidence of any collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered instrument.

2. MAHARASHTRA SPECIAL MANDATE (SECTION 55 OF THE MAHARASHTRA RENT CONTROL ACT):
(1) In the State of Maharashtra, every agreement for leave and license or letting of any premises must be in writing and registered under the Registration Act, 1908, regardless of the duration of the license (including standard 11-month agreements).
(2) The legal duty to initiate and secure registration of the tenancy or leave and license agreement lies squarely upon the Landlord/Licensor.
(3) Evidentiary Consequence: In the absence of a written and registered agreement, any contention of the tenant or licensee regarding the terms and conditions on which the premises were given on rent or leave and license shall be accepted by the competent authority or court unless the contrary is proved by the landlord.
(4) Criminal Penalty: A landlord who fails to register a rental or leave and license agreement in Maharashtra is liable for prosecution punishable with imprisonment up to three months, or fine up to five thousand rupees, or both.
